+++
title = "Welcome & Overview"
[extra]
due = "January 8"
index = 1
thread = 346
+++

## Notes

* Welcome to ECE 4/599! I'm really excited to dive deep into some research with you all this quarter!

* Why are memory systems important, why do we care?
    - Simply: store data
    - But why is it challenging? Ultimately, physical constraints
    - We can have large memories or fast memories, but not both. This means if we have a lot of data we need
      fast access to, we need to use careful engineering. 
    - Today's workloads (e.g., AI) are memory hungry. They use a lot of data and need to crunch it quickly. 
* How do we manage with disparate memory performance profiles? 
    - Hierarchies
    - How to move between?
    - How much should be automatic? 
    - How can we speculate? 
    - What is the correct granularity of access and transfer? 
* Course overview and the [syllabus][].
    * Communication will be on Discord and on [GitHub][gh-discuss]. 
    * Class sessions will usually follow this structure:
        * First part:
            * I'll do some traditional "lecturing" in class
            * Some (but not all) sessions will include lessons that may or may not have associated tasks for you to complete.
        * Second part:
            * Everyone should read the relevant paper beforehand so we can have a good discussion. You'll need to post a comment in the paper's discussion thread on GitHub. 
            * The paper leader's job is to present the paper using slides, guide the discussion, answer discussion questions on GitHub, and organize the lab to work on a collective blog post. 
            * The scribe takes notes from in-class discussions.
            * The blogger summarizes the paper (using input from the paper leader's notes, online and in-class discussions, and their own interpretations) into a technical blog post. 
            * The reviewer summarizes strengths and weaknesses of the paper. 
            * Remember to keep track of the [schedule][]!
        * Hacking sessions: in some cases I will give you time during class to hack on your project with me around to help. 
    * The course project.
    * Policies, academic integrity, generative AI, respect, accessibility.
* This lesson's task is about getting set up for the course. 
    * Ask questions about the course setup in this lesson's [discussion topic][topic]!
    * Your first task is below: introduce yourself in Discord right now, and (offline) pick a paper discussion to lead.
        * This website and the [blog][], including the [GitHub repository][gh] where you'll send PRs. The idea is that we are working together in this class as a real research team might. 

## Tasks

* Read the [syllabus][]! 
* Sign up for Discord and introduce yourself
* Do the background reading for Wednesday and for next week. 
* Decide on teams for projects. See the [syllabus][].
* Ask any questions about the course structure or content in this lesson's [discussion topic][topic].
* Pick a paper from the [schedule][] whose discussion you want to lead. 
  Claim it by opening a pull request that modifies [`content.toml`][cont-gh] to fill in your name on one of the `leader = "TK"` lines.

[syllabus]: @/syllabus.md
[blog]: @/blog/_index.md
[gh]: https://github.com/khale/mem-systems-w25
[gh-discuss]: https://github.com/khale/mem-systems-w25/discussions
[topic]: https://github.com/khale/mem-systems-w25/discussions/1
[schedule]: @/schedule.md
[cont-gh]: https://github.com/khale/mem-systems-w25/blob/main/data/content.toml
[lessons]: @/lesson/_index.md
